Good morning.
Good morning. Good morning.
Good to have you here. We have the Office
of the Health and Disability.
I'm here for 20 minutes. We're in public session.
I will hand it over to you. You
Thank you.
I want to start by acknowledging and thanking Mr.
Lowndes for his petition.
I had the privilege of meeting with Mr.
Lowndes to understand his experience of HDC processes,
and I have no hesitation in extending to him
a further apology for the delays in managing his complaint
and the impact that those delays had on
both him and his family.
I am very aware more generally of negative impact
that UE delay and the assessment
and investigation of complaints can have on
participants to the process.
I want to reassure Mr.
Lowndes and this committee that HDC is fully committed
to reducing delays in our process
and improving communication with parties to the complaint.
I also believe that if Mr.
Lowndes were to make his complaint today,
his experience would be very different owing
to new processes that we have in place.
I'd like to start by providing some context
to the committee, uh,
including our recent performance indicators.
And I'd be certainly happy to provide this in writing
to the committee if it would assist.
Mr. Low's complaint was made in January, 2022
at a time when HDC was managing an unprecedented
and unanticipated increase in the volume
of complaints owing to the pandemic.
Indeed, in the 2122 year HDC received a
25% increase in its volume of complaints.
This together with the novel
and complex issues that we were having to manage as part
of the COVID pandemic,
undoubtedly put us under significant pressure.
Furthermore, rather than declining
after the pandemic complaints, volumes have remained high.
I'd like to give you a snapshot of recent funding.
HDCs current baseline is 17.8 million,
which includes 2.1 million of funding designated
to the aged care function Aged Care commissioner function
in the 2021 budget.
HDC was given a time limited funding increase
of 2.9 million, which was tagged to sustainability
and new functions under the end of Life Choice Act.
That funding was due to expire in June, 2024.
However, uh, government extended that funding
to 30 June, 2025
and this year, HDC was granted one-off funds of 1 million
targeted to help us reduce the backdrop, meaning
that our baseline this year was reduced by 1.9 million
instead of the anticipated 2.9 million.
And this has necessitated a restructure within HDC,
including a reduction of FTE effective from four August.
However, notwithstanding these funding challenges
and sustained compliance volume,
HDCs performance has significantly improved over the past 18
months, owing to a small re leadership restructure in 2024.
And staffing process
and operational changes directed at streamlining processes
and ensuring that our valuable resources are directed
to those complaints, uh, that need our involvement,
our program of system improvement is yielding very positive
and consistent results to the extent
that we are making significant gains in reducing ca our
cases on hand, which will in turn allow us
to address delays in our process.
We believe that we can maintain our complaints resolution
function within our current baseline.
Although gaining a business as usual complaint level
will take some time.
And I think the recent figures speak for themselves
in 24 25 HDC increased our number
of closures by 40%
and reduced our number of open complaints by 33%.
We are now closing more complaints than we receive
with a net closure rate about 120%,
120%.
This puts us in a much better position to manage our backlog
and timeliness issues.
We have made progress in significantly reducing the backlog
in parts of the business.
For example, in our complaints assessment team, which um,
manages about 92% of our complaints,
we have reduced the number of complaints on hand
by 47% in 24 25.
And approximately 70% of complaints received by HDC
are closed within six months.
However, it is fair to say that we are still grappling
with the flow on effect of the 2022 COVID surge,
particularly in our investigation space.
Space, which deals with the more serious
and complex complaints
and which require more resource to resolve.
Timeliness is still a problem in this area
with investigations taking on average at the moment,
2.7 years to complete.
However, we have a backlog plan in place
and we are aiming to reach a business as usual state
by September, 2026 by business as usual.
What I mean is a, um, a, an ideal number
of cases on hand within that team, ideally in our view,
noting both the process of investigation
and that that quasi-judicial in nature.
We think that investigations should take between 18
to 24 months to complete.
It is important to recognize
that not all delay rests at the feet
of H-D-C-H-D-C is reliant on external parties
to provide information to it and an pressured health
and disability system.
Time extensions are often requested.
Investigations are also in-depth pro uh,
in depth independent processes, often involving analysis
of voluminous quantities of information
and requiring very careful decision making.
They're processes that are taken very seriously, not just
by HDC, but also by the providers of service, noting
that it's through the formal process of investigation
that breaches of the code of rights are determined by us.
Might jump in shortly Yes. Because we've got 20 minutes.
Yes. I phone For seven.
Um, and I want members to have a good shot
Of questions. I sure.
Can I just, um, make another few points then Mr.
Chair? Um, do a
Couple more minutes and then I'll open.
Yeah. I did want to, um, reference that um,
we do have very robust processes in place,
not withstanding those issues, to escalate issues
of public safety and quality, um, improvement that
as, as they come to hand.
I also wanted to alert the committee to our IT capacity,
which I'm pleased to report.
We have received $500,000 from government, uh,
in June, 2025.
This was a project we had already committed to
and made savings for.
We are in the build phase of that project
and we expect to, uh, have
that new complaints management system in place
by March, 2026. Alright,
I'm gonna, I'm gonna open up to Chris
and just, just conscious of time.
Yes. Um, and I see a few hands up.
We'll start with Jenny and then I've got Asha.
Thank you very much for, uh,
being in front of committee today.
Appreciate that you are here.
Just a couple of questions around, um, at, at the beginning
of your comment, you talked about you'd had a 25%
increase in 2022.
Correct. Post COVID.
Can you tell us what, what does
25% represent in terms of numbers?
And you also mentioned that, uh, these are a, a nature
of serious and complex complaints.
Um, in terms of the stuff that's come post COVID,
can you sort of just extrapolate that out a little bit?
So in the 20 21, 20 20 to 2021 year,
we received 2,721 complaints
and 2122 3,413.
And those are not just,
we didn't receive just additional complaints.
We also received, we received inquiries as well.
And of course our advocacy service also receives complaints.
This is just HDC I'm talking about.
Alright. And so the nature of, uh, of serious
and complex complaints
Yeah. For invest COVID,
Uh, for investigating
for investigations or in in the COVID time,
Uh, for investigating as well as, yeah.
When complaints come into the HDC, one
of the very first things we do is we assess the seriousness
of the complaint and it, we, we receive a very broad range
of complaints from those of perhaps, um, lesser seriousness,
which we can refer straight back to the provider
or to our advocacy service to manage at source.
The more serious complaints often involve very serious
outcomes, including serious, um, serious health outcomes as,
as well as death, but also serious systemic issues and
or, um, serious failings in the provision of care.
And we measure that against the Code of Rights, of course,
which involves a suite of informed consent rights, uh,
reasonable care rights, right.
To support, um, et cetera.
So that, and, and they can be extremely serious.
So just to up on that
and how, how many of those
of a serious nature are as a result of COVID
Are as a result of COVID in that COVID period?
Yeah. Um, actually not, not too many at the moment,
but it's the fact that we received that enormous surge in
that year, which essentially we had to manage,
increase in volume coming in the front door, the various,
um, complex
and quite unusual issues that we were having to manage
during the COVID time.
And that had flow on effects for the rest of the system.
And that complaint volume was maintained.
There was no significant drop following the COVID pandemic.
Alright. And good.
Um, thank you very much. I just wanna pick up on, um,
what I think is the tone of the petition, which is
that there are big systems changes
that can happen at the end of a lengthy kind
of inquiry process, but for many people this is about
preventing, uh, a similar experience for other patients.
You have mentioned third parties and waiting on information.
Is that after the, um, complaints have been lodged
or are you taking into account before that as well?
I'm thinking here where the coroners court is involved in
perhaps, uh, the coroners has not passed on documents
or in other events where there might be
a police file involved.
What's the story there?
Yeah, so we have a memorandum of understanding
with the coroner's court
and we have a conversation right at the start
of the complaint as to which, um,
which process will take precedence.
So sometimes the coroner goes first,
sometimes the HDC goes first.
I was actually talking about, um, the gathering
of information during the HDC process.
So from the point at which the complaint is lodged
to the conclusion of the complaint.
Um, and as I said, we are reliant on those external parties
to provide us the information.
And during that time,
you have the ability if you are concerned about
public safety right.
To anybody including a minister. Absolutely.
Um, what, what course of action would you expect a minister
to take if they received one of your letters?
Um, so we, we have written to the minister
or certainly to other agencies as well,
and we monitor the response
to those concerns when they're raised.
If we are not satisfied with the response,
we will respond again and,
and ask for the issue to be addressed.
And I, as I said, I want to reassure the committee
that we act swiftly on any public safety concerns
that we see and quality improvement measures,
and we continue that work even while the investigation
and assessment is taking place.
So what I'm hearing is you would expect
through the chair, please, sorry.
Thank you. You would expect the ministerial response
or some kind of action to be taken
and if not, you would then feel compelled act given
that it would've taken, uh, some kind of compulsion to,
to elevate it to a minister in the first place. Is that,
I think that that's, um, what is, um,
wonderful about the HDC Act.
We have that ability to follow up
and uh, if we remain concerned,
then we can also take action.
Um, have you written to the minister
during this term of parliament?
Pardon? During this term of parliament? Trying to recall.
Sorry. Uh, yes.
We raised concerns about ophthalmology delays in a certain
part region of, um, in certain regions of New Zealand
and the concern about the harm
that could potentially be occurring
as a result of those delays.
Thank you. And is there any, uh, measurement
that you use to assess whether over time, uh,
the seriousness of complaints that aren't investigated?
Uh, changes? I mean, it would be, um, uh,
undesirable if you reduced your waiting time by, um,
raising your threshold for what you investigated.
Um, in 2020 when I first became commissioner,
there were concerns raised by the ombudsman at that time
that the threshold for investigation was too high
and we have consciously reduced that threshold.
So the number of investigations has gone from roughly four
to 5% to seven to 8% of complaints
that go through to investigation.
I feel that we have got, um, the threshold correct.
The way we, that we can assess that is
by assessing the breaches
that we're determining the number of breaches.
Uh, and we are also very much focused on the
resolution needs of the consumer.
So we try and very much to engage with the consumer
to understand, uh, what would meet their needs.
But we also take into account public interest.
So if there are, and we have broad powers as,
as I've alluded to, um, we can raise concerns.
Quick point of clarification, different to, um,
just proceeding down an investigation
route if, if we need to.
The point about the breaches, I assume if you are
investigating um, uh, too many complaints,
they would be diluted
and you'd be less likely to find a breach in
the set of, um, yes.
Uh, cases that you investigate.
Is that quantified as a number
and reported in your annual reports?
Uh, yes it does. Thank You. You've got a so don't you.
Yes. Thank you. Just on that last question about whether
you've written to the minister, have you written
to Minister Matt Ducey regarding youth mental health
and any specific cases involving digital
and police responses to emergency calls?
Uh, we have written to, um, minister Ducey,
you are correct, regarding, uh, youth line services.
And are you expecting a response from the minister to the
We are, in fact, we think we had engagement
with the minister very recently on that. Okay,
Very good.
Excellent. Thank you. Um, and I appreciate a lot the
figures you've given us, uh, uh, percentages.
I, I see this petitioner, um, was waiting three years.
How many cases, what's the number
of cases which are three years or older?
That's cent.
Uh, I don't actually have the number of, um,
files in investigations that we have
that are over three years old.
Uh, but uh, it is um, approximately,
uh, 40% of the, um, investigation files
that we currently have.
Um, we do, um, uh,
and we have has Morag alluded to, um, have a, um,
a, a structured plan to, um, prioritize those older files
to get through, um, to completion.
There are various reasons why many of them are delayed.
So you, you're saying you're calling them investigations.
Is that a complaint that has had
some action on it versus a complaint
that has been sitting there for three years?
Yes. So, um, we have recently changed our processes such
that we are identifying
and getting complaints more quickly through
to the investigations space.
Um, investigations has have to meet a legal threshold
or legal tests that's in the legislation.
Sometimes we gather information prior to that process
and our complaints assessment phase
and then we evaluate that information
to determine whether the statutory test has been met for,
for progression through to the investigations
we are counting, delay from the point of complaint through
to completion, be that in the complaints assessment team
or our investigation starts.
There's definitely been work on them,
but it's fair to say
that there have been delays within
that process. Absolutely.
Uh, and I appreciate you talking about, uh,
delays in information from other, other agencies.
How, how many of, how much of that delay is sitting
with the HDC
and how much of that delay is sitting with external players?
I think that that is very difficult to quantify
because it does very much depend on the
individual complaint.
I, what I can say is yes,
of course there has been some delay as for the reasons
that I've outlined, um, in HDC processes.
But take for example, our need for expert advice.
When you have a complex clinical matter,
we don't have in-house clinical advice available
and we have to seek that externally.
You have to identify the right expert
advisor that can take time.
'cause we use a peer for peer situation. And uh, sorry,
I'll jump in there. On Hamish's
comment, he is asking how many are with,
you know, due to stuff you're doing internally or,
or outsourced for, for opinion or some work?
Um, I how is it hard to quantify?
'cause it's like if you had a hundred cases,
you should be able to identify which
of those are currently not sitting with the HDC.
It's about management of caseload, isn't it?
I mean, when you give somebody an investigator a, a,
a complaint, um, they're having to manage
across their workload.
Uh, those where matters are out for receiving, for example,
a response from the provider seeking expert advice
Whilst Yeah. And but,
but they should be able to identify in each
of those cases if it is out for external advice
or whether it is out to someone to come back to you,
whether, whether you are waiting on
someone external to come in.
I, I don't understand how, I think that's hard to have a,
an overall picture of
Oh, we do have, absolutely have an overall picture.
I think what um, in terms of responding to the question,
we don't have, um, a system in which we compare
that, um, what you're
Saying is where the gaps are.
You don't dunno how many are sitting with the HT C
or how many are waiting on external information
and you don't know how many you've been waiting for three
or more years it seems like you No, no.
Don't have a high level overview of the cases that are
with the h htc.
So I think we are, sorry,
I think we are talking about slightly different things.
We absolutely do have a, um, an overview of those
and we can um, determine where, where cases are.
Uh, the quantum, I think, um, in terms of responding
to the question of what we were saying was
that we are not able to determine the quantum of time
that is, um, comparative
to internal processes versus, I don't
Think that was the question though.
I think the question was around, firstly
how many have been waiting three or more years
and secondly, how many are sitting with the HT C
for something you are doing internally
or how many you have reached out to get further information
that you are currently waiting on.
And that external party, um, is holding up the progress
of the investigation 'cause it's currently with them.
Is that right ish? Oh yeah, we
So we can, we can get that, that information.
Yeah. We cannot follow the journey
of the file using our current system.
I was gonna say, yeah.
What part of the difficulty is that the,
the there is manual effort to get that information
with our current system.
Yeah, we are expecting our CMS to be, um,
implemented in March, 2026
and that kind of information will be much more readily
available with that new computer system currently.
That level of detail needs to be manually, I
Mean 2025.
I find it quite striking that you don't have a high level
dashboard overview of that sort of stuff.
Um,
Why I was gonna, um, we have, we have been asking
for funding for a new CMS and as I alluded to, and as Mr.
Low has alluded to in his petition, we've been working
with the complaints management system based in Lotus Notes.
That's why we committed to getting a new CMS system
and that will be in place in March, 2026.
So just for clarification, by March, 2026,
you're no longer going
to have a system based on Lotus Notes?
That is correct. Thank you Chair.
I just wanna refer back to the, the petition.
So basically what they mentioned is lack
of government action.
So, but what you also say that is now, um,
you got a new mode or which highly improved the efficiency
of solving the cases.
So on that aspect, does that mean
that you already got the solution
to address the petition request?
I believe that we actually, if, if I've understood the,
the, um, question correctly, I think we've addressed many
of the concerns that Mr.
Lowndes has raised in his petition. Mm-hmm.
He focused very much on our complaints management system.
Yes. And we have a solution for that.
He, he focused on the processes
and without, I I say again, it, it was the delay
that he had was unreasonable and I fully accept that.
But we have made some very significant gains in terms
of being able to streamline our processes,
focus on our staff, um, and,
and focus on um, more astute complaints management
to the extent that we are managing
some of the issues that he's raised.
That's good. That's Hamish one more stuff
and then we'll, we'll close it. Yeah. So,
So, so you are saying, so you've got half a million
dollars, which is gonna fix,
gonna give you a new IT system, you're expecting that
New IT system's gonna be able
to give you a better overview of where cases are
and a greater faster closure rate.
Is that correct? Ye yes. We Excellent. Yeah, that's,
It would certainly increase efficiencies on our manual
tasks that we currently across the business have to,
And you've been asking this for a number of years.
That's right. Excellent. Thank you. Thank you.
We're we've shot over time. Thank you for coming in today.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.